CONTRIBUTING.md, before:

# Contributing to LLM-Diagnose Framework

Thank you for your interest in contributing to the LLM-Diagnose Framework! This document provides guidelines and instructions for contributing.

## How to Contribute

### Reporting Issues

If you find a bug or have a feature request, please open an issue on GitHub with:
- A clear description of the problem or feature
- Steps to reproduce (for bugs)
- Expected vs actual behavior
- Your environment (Python version, OS, etc.)

### Contributing Code

1. **Fork the repository** and create a new branch for your changes
   ```bash
   git checkout -b feature/your-feature-name
   ```

2. **Make your changes** following the coding standards below

3. **Test your changes**
   ```bash
   # Install in development mode
   pip install -e ".[dev]"
   
   # Run tests
   pytest
   
   # Run linting
   black llm_diagnose/
   flake8 llm_diagnose/
   mypy llm_diagnose/
   ```

4. **Commit your changes** with clear, descriptive commit messages
   ```bash
   git commit -m "Add feature: description of what you added"
   ```

5. **Push to your fork** and open a Pull Request

### Pull Request Guidelines

- Provide a clear description of what your PR does
- Reference any related issues
- Ensure all tests pass
- Update documentation if needed
- Follow the existing code style

## Code Style

### Python Style

- Follow PEP 8 style guidelines
- Use `black` for code formatting (line length: 100)
- Type hints are encouraged but not required for all functions
- Use descriptive variable and function names

### Project Structure

- **Models**: Add new model runners in `llm_diagnose/models/`
- **Evaluators**: Add new evaluators in `llm_diagnose/evaluators/`
- **Datasets**: Add new dataset loaders in `llm_diagnose/datasets/`
- **Summarizers**: Add new summarizers in `llm_diagnose/summarizers/`

### Adding New Components

#### Adding a New Model Runner

1. Create a new file in `llm_diagnose/models/` (e.g., `my_model.py`)
2. Implement a class inheriting from `BaseModelRunner`
3. Register the model in the model registry:
   ```python
   from llm_diagnose.registry.model_registry import get_model_registry
   
   @get_model_registry().register_model("my_model")
   def create_my_model(**kwargs):
       # Your model creation logic
       return MyModelRunner(...)
   ```
4. Import and register in `llm_diagnose/models/__init__.py`

#### Adding a New Evaluator

1. Create a new file in `llm_diagnose/evaluators/` (e.g., `my_evaluator.py`)
2. Implement a class inheriting from `BaseEvaluator`
3. Register the evaluator:
   ```python
   from llm_diagnose.evaluators.registry import get_evaluator_registry
   
   @get_evaluator_registry().register_evaluator("my_evaluator")
   class MyEvaluator(BaseEvaluator):
       def evaluate(self, model, dataset, **kwargs):
           # Your evaluation logic
           return results
   ```
4. Add to `llm_diagnose/evaluators/__init__.py` if needed

#### Adding a New Dataset

1. Create a new file in `llm_diagnose/datasets/` (e.g., `my_dataset.py`)
2. Implement a dataset loader function
3. Register the dataset:
   ```python
   from llm_diagnose.registry.dataset_registry import get_dataset_registry
   
   @get_dataset_registry().register_dataset("my_dataset")
   def load_my_dataset(**kwargs):
       # Your dataset loading logic
       return dataset
   ```
4. Add to `llm_diagnose/datasets/__init__.py` if needed

## Testing

- Write tests for new features in the `tests/` directory
- Follow the existing test patterns
- Ensure tests pass with `pytest`
- Aim for good test coverage

## Documentation

- Update README.md if you add new features
- Add docstrings to new functions and classes
- Follow the existing documentation style
- Update example configs if you change configuration schemas

## Development Setup

```bash
# Clone the repository
git clone https://github.com/yourusername/LLM-Diagnose-Framework.git
cd LLM-Diagnose-Framework

# Install in development mode with all dependencies
pip install -e ".[dev,all]"

# Run tests
pytest

# Format code
black llm_diagnose/

# Type checking
mypy llm_diagnose/
```

## Questions?

If you have questions about contributing, please open an issue or contact the maintainers.

Thank you for contributing to LLM-Diagnose Framework!

Commit message:

Rename LLM-Diagnose Framework to DeepScan: Updated all references in documentation, configuration files, and codebase to reflect the new framework name. Adjusted project structure and paths accordingly, ensuring consistency across contributing guidelines, README files, and example configurations. Removed deprecated files related to the old framework name.

CONTRIBUTING.md, after:

# Contributing to DeepScan Framework

Thank you for your interest in contributing to the DeepScan Framework! This document provides guidelines and instructions for contributing.

## How to Contribute

### Reporting Issues

If you find a bug or have a feature request, please open an issue on GitHub with:
- A clear description of the problem or feature
- Steps to reproduce (for bugs)
- Expected vs actual behavior
- Your environment (Python version, OS, etc.)

### Contributing Code

1. **Fork the repository** and create a new branch for your changes
   ```bash
   git checkout -b feature/your-feature-name
   ```

2. **Make your changes** following the coding standards below

3. **Test your changes**
   ```bash
   # Install in development mode
   pip install -e ".[dev]"
   
   # Run tests
   pytest
   
   # Run linting
   black deepscan/
   flake8 deepscan/
   mypy deepscan/
   ```

4. **Commit your changes** with clear, descriptive commit messages
   ```bash
   git commit -m "Add feature: description of what you added"
   ```

5. **Push to your fork** and open a Pull Request

### Pull Request Guidelines

- Provide a clear description of what your PR does
- Reference any related issues
- Ensure all tests pass
- Update documentation if needed
- Follow the existing code style

## Code Style

### Python Style

- Follow PEP 8 style guidelines
- Use `black` for code formatting (line length: 100)
- Type hints are encouraged but not required for all functions
- Use descriptive variable and function names

### Project Structure

- **Models**: Add new model runners in `deepscan/models/`
- **Evaluators**: Add new evaluators in `deepscan/evaluators/`
- **Datasets**: Add new dataset loaders in `deepscan/datasets/`
- **Summarizers**: Add new summarizers in `deepscan/summarizers/`

### Adding New Components

#### Adding a New Model Runner

1. Create a new file in `deepscan/models/` (e.g., `my_model.py`)
2. Implement a class inheriting from `BaseModelRunner`
3. Register the model in the model registry:
   ```python
   from deepscan.registry.model_registry import get_model_registry
   
   @get_model_registry().register_model("my_model")
   def create_my_model(**kwargs):
       # Your model creation logic
       return MyModelRunner(...)
   ```
4. Import and register in `deepscan/models/__init__.py`

#### Adding a New Evaluator

1. Create a new file in `deepscan/evaluators/` (e.g., `my_evaluator.py`)
2. Implement a class inheriting from `BaseEvaluator`
3. Register the evaluator:
   ```python
   from deepscan.evaluators.registry import get_evaluator_registry
   
   @get_evaluator_registry().register_evaluator("my_evaluator")
   class MyEvaluator(BaseEvaluator):
       def evaluate(self, model, dataset, **kwargs):
           # Your evaluation logic
           return results
   ```
4. Add to `deepscan/evaluators/__init__.py` if needed

#### Adding a New Dataset

1. Create a new file in `deepscan/datasets/` (e.g., `my_dataset.py`)
2. Implement a dataset loader function
3. Register the dataset:
   ```python
   from deepscan.registry.dataset_registry import get_dataset_registry
   
   @get_dataset_registry().register_dataset("my_dataset")
   def load_my_dataset(**kwargs):
       # Your dataset loading logic
       return dataset
   ```
4. Add to `deepscan/datasets/__init__.py` if needed

## Testing

- Write tests for new features in the `tests/` directory
- Follow the existing test patterns
- Ensure tests pass with `pytest`
- Aim for good test coverage

## Documentation

- Update README.md if you add new features
- Add docstrings to new functions and classes
- Follow the existing documentation style
- Update example configs if you change configuration schemas

## Development Setup

```bash
# Clone the repository
git clone https://github.com/AI45Lab/DeepScan.git
cd DeepScan

# Install in development mode with all dependencies
pip install -e ".[dev,all]"

# Run tests
pytest

# Format code
black deepscan/

# Type checking
mypy deepscan/
```

## Questions?

If you have questions about contributing, please open an issue or contact the maintainers.

Thank you for contributing to DeepScan Framework!
