README.md, before:

<div align="center">
  <picture>
    <source media="(prefers-color-scheme: dark)" srcset="logo-dark.svg">
    <source media="(prefers-color-scheme: light)" srcset="logo-light.svg">
    <img alt="DeepScan Logo" src="logo-dark.svg" width="280">
  </picture>

  <br>
  
  <h1>Diagnostic Framework for LLMs and MLLMs</h1>

  <!-- <p><b>DeepScan: Diagnostic Framework for LLMs</b></p> -->
  <a href="https://ai45.shlab.org.cn/safety-entry"><img alt="Homepage" src="https://img.shields.io/static/v1?label=&message=%F0%9F%8C%90%20Homepage&color=2F81F7&style=flat"></a>
  <a href="#"><img alt="Technical Report (arXiv)" src="https://img.shields.io/static/v1?label=&message=Report%20(late%20Feb)&color=B31B1B&style=flat&logo=arxiv&logoColor=FFFFFF"></a>
  <a href="#quick-start"><img alt="Documentation" src="https://img.shields.io/badge/Documentation-8CA1AF?style=flat-square&logo=readthedocs&logoColor=white"></a>

<!-- <a href="#">
    <img alt="Hugging Face" src="https://img.shields.io/static/v1?label=&message=Hugging%20Face&color=FFCC00&style=flat&logo=huggingface&logoColor=000000">
  </a> -->
</div>
<div style="height: 30px;"></div>

A flexible and extensible framework for diagnosing Large Language Models (LLMs) and Multimodal Large Language Models (MLLMs). Designed around the "Register → Configure → Execute → Summarize" workflow, this framework provides unified Runner, Evaluator, and Summarizer abstractions for quickly building or customizing diagnostic pipelines.

> **🛡️ Safety evaluation:** See our sister project **[DeepSafe](https://github.com/AI45Lab/DeepSafe)** — together with DeepScan it forms a **complete evaluation-diagnosis engineering pipeline**.

## ✨ Features

- **📦 Model Registry**: Register and manage model instances, supporting Qwen, Llama, Mistral, Gemma, GLM, InternLM, InternVL, and more
- **🚀 Unified Model Interface**: Consistent `generate`/`chat` abstraction across model families
- **📊 Dataset Registry**: Register and manage dataset instances, supporting multiple data formats
- **⚙️ Configuration Management**: Load and manage configurations from YAML/JSON files
- **🔍 Extensible Evaluators**: Built-in diagnostic evaluators:
  - **TELLME**: Quantify the degree of disentanglement between different concepts in representations using metrics
  - **X-Boundary**: Diagnose hidden representation spaces: geometric relationships between safe/harmful/boundary regions
  - **MI-Peaks**: Track information evolution in reasoning representations during generation based on mutual information
  - **SPIN**: Analyze potential conflicts between safety objectives such as fairness and privacy
- **📝 Customizable Summarizers**: Aggregate and format evaluation results for different benchmarks
- **🔌 Plugin Architecture**: Easy to extend with custom evaluators and summarizers
- **💻 CLI Support**: Run evaluations directly from command line without writing code

## 📥 Installation

**Minimal install** (core dependencies only):
```bash
pip install -e .
```

**Recommended install** (includes common dependencies for most use cases):
```bash
pip install -e ".[default]"
```

**For development:**
```bash
pip install -e ".[dev]"
```

**Additional optional dependencies:**

```bash
# 🤖 Model runner dependencies
pip install -e ".[qwen]"          # Qwen models
pip install -e ".[glm]"           # GLM models
pip install -e ".[ministral3]"    # Ministral 3 (multimodal) models

# 🔬 Evaluator dependencies
pip install -e ".[tellme]"        # TELLME evaluator + metrics stack
pip install -e ".[xboundary]"     # X-Boundary evaluator + visualization stack
pip install -e ".[mi_peaks]"      # MI-Peaks evaluator

# 🎁 Convenience extras
pip install -e ".[all]"           # All evaluator dependencies (tellme + xboundary + mi_peaks)

```
<a id="quick-start"></a>
## 🚀 Quick Start

### 🎯 End-to-end from a config (any evaluator)

**Python API:**
```python
from deepscan import run_from_config

# YAML/JSON or dict with model/dataset/evaluator sections
results = run_from_config("examples/config.tellme.yaml")

# With output directory and run ID
results = run_from_config(
    "examples/config.tellme.yaml",
    output_dir="results",
    run_id="my_experiment",
)
```

**CLI** (no Python code needed):
```bash
# ✅ Basic usage
python -m deepscan.run --config examples/config.tellme.yaml --output-dir runs

# 🏷️ With custom run ID (optional; default is run_<timestamp>)
python -m deepscan.run --config examples/config.tellme.yaml --output-dir runs --run-id experiment_001

# 🔍 Dry run (validate config without loading model/dataset)
python -m deepscan.run --config examples/config.tellme.yaml --dry-run

# 💾 Optional: also write a single consolidated JSON to a specific location
python -m deepscan.run --config examples/config.tellme.yaml --output results.json
```

### 1. Register Models and Datasets (global registries) 📝

#### 🔧 Registering Individual Models

```python
from deepscan.registry.model_registry import get_model_registry
from deepscan.registry.dataset_registry import get_dataset_registry

# IMPORTANT: use the global registries so `run_from_config()` can find your entries
model_registry = get_model_registry()
dataset_registry = get_dataset_registry()

@model_registry.register_model("gpt2")
def create_gpt2():
    from transformers import GPT2LMHeadModel
    return GPT2LMHeadModel.from_pretrained("gpt2")

@dataset_registry.register_dataset("glue_sst2")
def create_sst2():
    from datasets import load_dataset
    return load_dataset("glue", "sst2", split="test")
```

#### Registering Model Families (e.g., Qwen) 🏗️



**Option 1: Register by generation (Recommended)** ⭐

```python
from deepscan.registry.model_registry import get_model_registry

registry = get_model_registry()

@registry.register_model(
    "qwen3",
    model_family="qwen",
    model_generation="qwen3",
)
def create_qwen3(model_name: str = "Qwen3-8B", device: str = "cuda", **kwargs):
    """Create Qwen3 model of specified name."""
    from transformers import AutoModelForCausalLM
    
    model_paths = {
        "Qwen3-0.6B": "Qwen/Qwen3-0.6B",
        "Qwen3-1.5B": "Qwen/Qwen3-1.5B",
        "Qwen3-2B": "Qwen/Qwen3-2B",
        "Qwen3-8B": "Qwen/Qwen3-8B",
        "Qwen3-14B": "Qwen/Qwen3-14B",
        "Qwen3-32B": "Qwen/Qwen3-32B",
    }
    
    if model_name not in model_paths:
        raise ValueError(f"Unsupported model: {model_name}")
    
    return AutoModelForCausalLM.from_pretrained(
        model_paths[model_name],
        device_map=device,
        **kwargs
    )

# Usage:
runner = registry.get_model("qwen3", model_name="Qwen3-8B", device="cuda")
```

**Option 2: Register individual models with generation prefix** 🔑

```python
@registry.register_model(
    "qwen3/Qwen3-8B",
    model_family="qwen",
    model_generation="qwen3",
    model_name="Qwen3-8B",
)
def create_qwen3_8b(device: str = "cuda", **kwargs):
    from transformers import AutoModelForCausalLM
    return AutoModelForCausalLM.from_pretrained(
        "Qwen/Qwen3-8B",
        device_map=device,
        **kwargs
    )

# Usage:
runner = registry.get_model("qwen3/Qwen3-8B", device="cuda")
```

**💡 Why organize by generation?** Different Qwen generations (qwen, qwen2, qwen3) may have different architectures, tokenizers, and configurations even at the same parameter count.

**Option 3: Use pre-registered models (Recommended)** ⭐

Qwen models are automatically registered when you import the framework:

```python
from deepscan.registry.model_registry import get_model_registry

# Models are already registered - just use them!
registry = get_model_registry()
runner = registry.get_model("qwen3", model_name="Qwen3-8B", device="cuda")
```

Or simply import the framework and models are ready:

```python
import deepscan  # Qwen models are auto-registered
from deepscan.registry.model_registry import get_model_registry

registry = get_model_registry()
runner = registry.get_model("qwen3", model_name="Qwen3-8B", device="cuda")
```

See `deepscan/models/` for model implementations and `examples/` for end-to-end evaluation pipelines.

#### Pre-registered resources (models + datasets) 🎁

The framework ships with ready-to-use registrations that are loaded automatically
when you `import deepscan`:

**🤖 Models** (see `deepscan/models/` for implementations):
- **Qwen**: qwen / qwen2 / qwen2.5 / qwen3 variants
- **Llama**: Llama 2/3 variants
- **Mistral**: Mistral and Ministral3 (multimodal)
- **Gemma**: Gemma and Gemma3 (multimodal)
- **GLM**: GLM-4 series
- **InternLM**: InternLM2/3 variants
- **InternVL**: InternVL3.5 (multimodal)

**📊 Datasets**:
- BeaverTails (HF dataset)
- `tellme/beaver_tails_filtered` (CSV loader)
- `xboundary/diagnostic` (X-Boundary diagnostic dataset)

```python
import deepscan
from deepscan.registry.model_registry import get_model_registry
from deepscan.registry.dataset_registry import get_dataset_registry

model_registry = get_model_registry()
dataset_registry = get_dataset_registry()

# Use any registered model
model = model_registry.get_model("qwen3", model_name="Qwen3-8B", device="cuda")
# Or Llama, Mistral, etc.

# Use registered datasets
dataset = dataset_registry.get_dataset("tellme/beaver_tails_filtered", test_path="/path/to/test.csv")
```

> 💡 The built-in dataset loaders rely on Hugging Face `datasets` (included in core dependencies).

To use a copy saved via `datasets.save_to_disk`, pass a local path:

```python
dataset = dataset_registry.get_dataset(
    "beaver_tails",
    split="330k_train",
    path="/path/to/BeaverTails",
)
```

### 🏃 Model Runners

Model registry lookups now return a **model runner**—an object that exposes a uniform
`generate()` interface and keeps the underlying Hugging Face model/tokenizer handy.

```python
from deepscan.models.base_runner import GenerationRequest, PromptMessage, PromptContent
from deepscan.registry.model_registry import get_model_registry

runner = get_model_registry().get_model(
    "qwen3",
    model_name="Qwen3-8B",
    device="cuda",
)

# Quick text generation
response = runner.generate("Explain what a registry pattern is in two sentences.")
print(response.text)

# Chat-style prompt with structured messages
chat_request = GenerationRequest.from_messages(
    [
        PromptMessage(role="system", content=[PromptContent(text="You are a math tutor.")]),
        PromptMessage(role="user", content=[PromptContent(text="Help me factor x^2 + 5x + 6.")]),
    ],
    temperature=0.1,
    max_new_tokens=128,
)
chat_response = runner.generate(chat_request)
print(chat_response.text)
```

Runners keep the raw model/tokenizer accessible via `runner.model` / `runner.tokenizer`
so existing diagnostic code can still reach low-level APIs when necessary.

### 2. Load Configuration ⚙️

```python
from deepscan import ConfigLoader

# Load from file
config = ConfigLoader.from_file("config.yaml")

# Or create from dictionary
config = ConfigLoader.from_dict({
    "model": {"generation": "qwen3", "model_name": "Qwen3-8B", "device": "cuda"},
    "dataset": {"name": "beaver_tails", "split": "330k_train"},
    "evaluator": {"type": "tellme", "batch_size": 4},
})
```

### 3. Create and Use Evaluators 🔍

Evaluators are typically used through `run_from_config`, but can also be used programmatically:

```python
from deepscan.evaluators.registry import get_evaluator_registry
from deepscan.registry.model_registry import get_model_registry
from deepscan.registry.dataset_registry import get_dataset_registry

# Get registries
evaluator_registry = get_evaluator_registry()
model_registry = get_model_registry()
dataset_registry = get_dataset_registry()

# Create evaluator from registry (pass options via config=)
evaluator = evaluator_registry.create_evaluator(
    "tellme",
    config=dict(batch_size=4, layer_ratio=0.6666, token_position=-1),
)

# Get model and dataset
model = model_registry.get_model("qwen3", model_name="Qwen3-8B", device="cuda")
dataset = dataset_registry.get_dataset("tellme/beaver_tails_filtered", test_path="/path/to/test.csv")

# Run evaluation (typically done via run_from_config)
# results = evaluator.evaluate(model, dataset, ...)
```

### 4. Create Custom Evaluators 🛠️

```python
from deepscan.evaluators.base import BaseEvaluator
from deepscan.evaluators.registry import get_evaluator_registry

class CustomEvaluator(BaseEvaluator):
    def evaluate(self, model, dataset, **kwargs):
        # Your custom evaluation logic here
        results = {}
        # ... implementation ...
        return results

# Register the evaluator
registry = get_evaluator_registry()
registry.register_evaluator("custom_eval")(CustomEvaluator)

# Use it in config or programmatically (pass options via config=)
evaluator = registry.create_evaluator("custom_eval", config=dict(param1=value1))
```

### 5. Summarize Results 📊

```python
from deepscan.summarizers.base import BaseSummarizer

class SimpleSummarizer(BaseSummarizer):
    def summarize(self, results, benchmark=None, **kwargs):
        # Minimal example: keep a small subset of keys
        return {
            "benchmark": benchmark,
            "keys": sorted(results.keys()),
        }

summarizer = SimpleSummarizer(name="simple")

summary = summarizer.summarize(results, benchmark="beaver_tails")

# Format as markdown
report = summarizer.format_report(summary, format="markdown")
print(report)
```

## 🏗️ Architecture

### Core Components

1. **📦 Registry System** (`deepscan/registry/`)
   - `BaseRegistry`: Generic registry pattern
   - `ModelRegistry`: Model registration and retrieval
   - `DatasetRegistry`: Dataset registration and retrieval

2. **⚙️ Configuration** (`deepscan/config/`)
   - `ConfigLoader`: Load and manage YAML/JSON configurations
   - Supports dot notation for nested access
   - Merge multiple configurations

3. **🔍 Evaluators** (`deepscan/evaluators/`)
   - `BaseEvaluator`: Abstract base class for all evaluators
   - `TellMeEvaluator`: Disentanglement metrics on BeaverTails
   - `XBoundaryEvaluator`: Safety boundary analysis
   - `MiPeaksEvaluator`: Model introspection and peak analysis
   - `SpinEvaluator`: Self-play fine-tuning evaluation
   - `EvaluatorRegistry`: Registry for evaluator classes

4. **📝 Summarizers** (`deepscan/summarizers/`)
   - `BaseSummarizer`: Abstract base class for all summarizers
   - `SummarizerRegistry`: Registry for summarizer classes
   - Multiple output formats (dict, JSON, Markdown, text)

## 🔧 Extending the Framework

### ➕ Adding a New Evaluator

1. Inherit from `BaseEvaluator`
2. Implement the `evaluate` method
3. Register it using the evaluator registry

```python
from deepscan.evaluators.base import BaseEvaluator
from deepscan.evaluators.registry import get_evaluator_registry

class MyEvaluator(BaseEvaluator):
    def evaluate(self, model, dataset, **kwargs):
        # Your evaluation logic
        results = {}
        # ... implementation ...
        return results

# Register
registry = get_evaluator_registry()
registry.register_evaluator("my_evaluator")(MyEvaluator)
```

### ➕ Adding a New Summarizer

1. Inherit from `BaseSummarizer`
2. Implement the `summarize` method
3. Register it using the summarizer registry

```python
from deepscan.summarizers.base import BaseSummarizer
from deepscan.summarizers.registry import get_summarizer_registry

class MySummarizer(BaseSummarizer):
    def summarize(self, results, benchmark=None, **kwargs):
        # Your summarization logic
        return {"summary": "..."}

# Register
registry = get_summarizer_registry()
registry.register_summarizer("my_summarizer")(MySummarizer)
```

## 📋 Example Configuration File

```yaml
# 📝 Minimal TELLME-style config (see `examples/config.tellme.yaml`; see `examples/` for multi-evaluator configs)
model:
  generation: qwen3
  model_name: Qwen3-8B
  device: cuda
  dtype: float16
  # Optional: point to a local checkpoint dir to avoid downloads
  # path: /path/to/models--Qwen--Qwen3-8B

dataset:
  name: tellme/beaver_tails_filtered
  test_path: /path/to/test.csv
  # train_path: /path/to/train.csv
  # max_rows: 400

evaluator:
  type: tellme
  batch_size: 4
  layer_ratio: 0.6666
  token_position: -1
```

## 📚 Examples

See the `examples/` directory for complete usage examples:

**🔍 Single-evaluator:**
- `config.tellme.yaml`: Minimal TELLME disentanglement metrics

**🔗 Multi-evaluator (same model, multiple benchmarks):**
- `config.x-boundary.tellme.spin.mi-peaks.qwen2.5-7b-instruct.yaml`: TELLME, X-Boundary, SPIN, and MI-Peaks with Qwen2.5-7B-Instruct
- `config.xboundary-llama3.3-70b-instruct.yaml`: Same suite with Llama 3.3 70B Instruct

## 💻 Development

```bash
# 📦 Install in development mode
pip install -e ".[dev]"

# ✅ Run tests
pytest

```

## 📄 License

MIT License

## 🤝 Contributing

Contributions are welcome! Please see [CONTRIBUTING.md](CONTRIBUTING.md) for guidelines on how to contribute.

## 📧 Contact

For questions or suggestions, please contact us:

  📧 Email: [shaojing@pjlab.org.cn](mailto:shaojing@pjlab.org.cn)

Commit message:

Update README files: Added a news section highlighting the latest diagnostic leaderboard and analysis results from DeepScan, covering various language and multimodal models, in both English and Chinese versions for improved visibility and engagement.

README.md, after:

<div align="center">
  <picture>
    <source media="(prefers-color-scheme: dark)" srcset="logo-dark.svg">
    <source media="(prefers-color-scheme: light)" srcset="logo-light.svg">
    <img alt="DeepScan Logo" src="logo-dark.svg" width="280">
  </picture>

  <br>
  
  <h1>Diagnostic Framework for LLMs and MLLMs</h1>

  <!-- <p><b>DeepScan: Diagnostic Framework for LLMs</b></p> -->
  <a href="https://ai45.shlab.org.cn/safety-entry"><img alt="Homepage" src="https://img.shields.io/static/v1?label=&message=%F0%9F%8C%90%20Homepage&color=2F81F7&style=flat"></a>
  <a href="#"><img alt="Technical Report (arXiv)" src="https://img.shields.io/static/v1?label=&message=Report%20(late%20Feb)&color=B31B1B&style=flat&logo=arxiv&logoColor=FFFFFF"></a>
  <a href="#quick-start"><img alt="Documentation" src="https://img.shields.io/badge/Documentation-8CA1AF?style=flat-square&logo=readthedocs&logoColor=white"></a>

<!-- <a href="#">
    <img alt="Hugging Face" src="https://img.shields.io/static/v1?label=&message=Hugging%20Face&color=FFCC00&style=flat&logo=huggingface&logoColor=000000">
  </a> -->
</div>
<div style="height: 30px;"></div>

A flexible and extensible framework for diagnosing Large Language Models (LLMs) and Multimodal Large Language Models (MLLMs). Designed around the "Register → Configure → Execute → Summarize" workflow, this framework provides unified Runner, Evaluator, and Summarizer abstractions for quickly building or customizing diagnostic pipelines.

> **🛡️ Safety evaluation:** See our sister project **[DeepSafe](https://github.com/AI45Lab/DeepSafe)** — together with DeepScan it forms a **complete evaluation-diagnosis engineering pipeline**.

## 🆕 News
- 🔥🔥🔥 2026-02-06: The latest diagnostic leaderboard from DeepScan and analysis results are out! Covering language and multimodal models including Qwen, Llama, Mistral, Gemma, GLM, InternLM, InternVL — check out the [**leaderboard**](https://ai45.shlab.org.cn/deepscan) and [**analysis**](https://ai45.shlab.org.cn/safety-report#diagnosis-report) to see the results!

## ✨ Features

- **📦 Model Registry**: Register and manage model instances, supporting Qwen, Llama, Mistral, Gemma, GLM, InternLM, InternVL, and more
- **🚀 Unified Model Interface**: Consistent `generate`/`chat` abstraction across model families
- **📊 Dataset Registry**: Register and manage dataset instances, supporting multiple data formats
- **⚙️ Configuration Management**: Load and manage configurations from YAML/JSON files
- **🔍 Extensible Evaluators**: Built-in diagnostic evaluators:
  - **TELLME**: Quantify the degree of disentanglement between different concepts in representations using metrics
  - **X-Boundary**: Diagnose hidden representation spaces: geometric relationships between safe/harmful/boundary regions
  - **MI-Peaks**: Track information evolution in reasoning representations during generation based on mutual information
  - **SPIN**: Analyze potential conflicts between safety objectives such as fairness and privacy
- **📝 Customizable Summarizers**: Aggregate and format evaluation results for different benchmarks
- **🔌 Plugin Architecture**: Easy to extend with custom evaluators and summarizers
- **💻 CLI Support**: Run evaluations directly from command line without writing code

## 📥 Installation

**Minimal install** (core dependencies only):
```bash
pip install -e .
```

**Recommended install** (includes common dependencies for most use cases):
```bash
pip install -e ".[default]"
```

**For development:**
```bash
pip install -e ".[dev]"
```

**Additional optional dependencies:**

```bash
# 🤖 Model runner dependencies
pip install -e ".[qwen]"          # Qwen models
pip install -e ".[glm]"           # GLM models
pip install -e ".[ministral3]"    # Ministral 3 (multimodal) models

# 🔬 Evaluator dependencies
pip install -e ".[tellme]"        # TELLME evaluator + metrics stack
pip install -e ".[xboundary]"     # X-Boundary evaluator + visualization stack
pip install -e ".[mi_peaks]"      # MI-Peaks evaluator

# 🎁 Convenience extras
pip install -e ".[all]"           # All evaluator dependencies (tellme + xboundary + mi_peaks)

```
<a id="quick-start"></a>
## 🚀 Quick Start

### 🎯 End-to-end from a config (any evaluator)

**Python API:**
```python
from deepscan import run_from_config

# YAML/JSON or dict with model/dataset/evaluator sections
results = run_from_config("examples/config.tellme.yaml")

# With output directory and run ID
results = run_from_config(
    "examples/config.tellme.yaml",
    output_dir="results",
    run_id="my_experiment",
)
```

**CLI** (no Python code needed):
```bash
# ✅ Basic usage
python -m deepscan.run --config examples/config.tellme.yaml --output-dir runs

# 🏷️ With custom run ID (optional; default is run_<timestamp>)
python -m deepscan.run --config examples/config.tellme.yaml --output-dir runs --run-id experiment_001

# 🔍 Dry run (validate config without loading model/dataset)
python -m deepscan.run --config examples/config.tellme.yaml --dry-run

# 💾 Optional: also write a single consolidated JSON to a specific location
python -m deepscan.run --config examples/config.tellme.yaml --output results.json
```

### 1. Register Models and Datasets (global registries) 📝

#### 🔧 Registering Individual Models

```python
from deepscan.registry.model_registry import get_model_registry
from deepscan.registry.dataset_registry import get_dataset_registry

# IMPORTANT: use the global registries so `run_from_config()` can find your entries
model_registry = get_model_registry()
dataset_registry = get_dataset_registry()

@model_registry.register_model("gpt2")
def create_gpt2():
    from transformers import GPT2LMHeadModel
    return GPT2LMHeadModel.from_pretrained("gpt2")

@dataset_registry.register_dataset("glue_sst2")
def create_sst2():
    from datasets import load_dataset
    return load_dataset("glue", "sst2", split="test")
```

#### Registering Model Families (e.g., Qwen) 🏗️



**Option 1: Register by generation (Recommended)** ⭐

```python
from deepscan.registry.model_registry import get_model_registry

registry = get_model_registry()

@registry.register_model(
    "qwen3",
    model_family="qwen",
    model_generation="qwen3",
)
def create_qwen3(model_name: str = "Qwen3-8B", device: str = "cuda", **kwargs):
    """Create Qwen3 model of specified name."""
    from transformers import AutoModelForCausalLM
    
    model_paths = {
        "Qwen3-0.6B": "Qwen/Qwen3-0.6B",
        "Qwen3-1.5B": "Qwen/Qwen3-1.5B",
        "Qwen3-2B": "Qwen/Qwen3-2B",
        "Qwen3-8B": "Qwen/Qwen3-8B",
        "Qwen3-14B": "Qwen/Qwen3-14B",
        "Qwen3-32B": "Qwen/Qwen3-32B",
    }
    
    if model_name not in model_paths:
        raise ValueError(f"Unsupported model: {model_name}")
    
    return AutoModelForCausalLM.from_pretrained(
        model_paths[model_name],
        device_map=device,
        **kwargs
    )

# Usage:
runner = registry.get_model("qwen3", model_name="Qwen3-8B", device="cuda")
```

**Option 2: Register individual models with generation prefix** 🔑

```python
@registry.register_model(
    "qwen3/Qwen3-8B",
    model_family="qwen",
    model_generation="qwen3",
    model_name="Qwen3-8B",
)
def create_qwen3_8b(device: str = "cuda", **kwargs):
    from transformers import AutoModelForCausalLM
    return AutoModelForCausalLM.from_pretrained(
        "Qwen/Qwen3-8B",
        device_map=device,
        **kwargs
    )

# Usage:
runner = registry.get_model("qwen3/Qwen3-8B", device="cuda")
```

**💡 Why organize by generation?** Different Qwen generations (qwen, qwen2, qwen3) may have different architectures, tokenizers, and configurations even at the same parameter count.

**Option 3: Use pre-registered models (Recommended)** ⭐

Qwen models are automatically registered when you import the framework:

```python
from deepscan.registry.model_registry import get_model_registry

# Models are already registered - just use them!
registry = get_model_registry()
runner = registry.get_model("qwen3", model_name="Qwen3-8B", device="cuda")
```

Or simply import the framework and models are ready:

```python
import deepscan  # Qwen models are auto-registered
from deepscan.registry.model_registry import get_model_registry

registry = get_model_registry()
runner = registry.get_model("qwen3", model_name="Qwen3-8B", device="cuda")
```

See `deepscan/models/` for model implementations and `examples/` for end-to-end evaluation pipelines.

#### Pre-registered resources (models + datasets) 🎁

The framework ships with ready-to-use registrations that are loaded automatically
when you `import deepscan`:

**🤖 Models** (see `deepscan/models/` for implementations):
- **Qwen**: qwen / qwen2 / qwen2.5 / qwen3 variants
- **Llama**: Llama 2/3 variants
- **Mistral**: Mistral and Ministral3 (multimodal)
- **Gemma**: Gemma and Gemma3 (multimodal)
- **GLM**: GLM-4 series
- **InternLM**: InternLM2/3 variants
- **InternVL**: InternVL3.5 (multimodal)

**📊 Datasets**:
- BeaverTails (HF dataset)
- `tellme/beaver_tails_filtered` (CSV loader)
- `xboundary/diagnostic` (X-Boundary diagnostic dataset)

```python
import deepscan
from deepscan.registry.model_registry import get_model_registry
from deepscan.registry.dataset_registry import get_dataset_registry

model_registry = get_model_registry()
dataset_registry = get_dataset_registry()

# Use any registered model
model = model_registry.get_model("qwen3", model_name="Qwen3-8B", device="cuda")
# Or Llama, Mistral, etc.

# Use registered datasets
dataset = dataset_registry.get_dataset("tellme/beaver_tails_filtered", test_path="/path/to/test.csv")
```

> 💡 The built-in dataset loaders rely on Hugging Face `datasets` (included in core dependencies).

To use a copy saved via `datasets.save_to_disk`, pass a local path:

```python
dataset = dataset_registry.get_dataset(
    "beaver_tails",
    split="330k_train",
    path="/path/to/BeaverTails",
)
```

### 🏃 Model Runners

Model registry lookups now return a **model runner**—an object that exposes a uniform
`generate()` interface and keeps the underlying Hugging Face model/tokenizer handy.

```python
from deepscan.models.base_runner import GenerationRequest, PromptMessage, PromptContent
from deepscan.registry.model_registry import get_model_registry

runner = get_model_registry().get_model(
    "qwen3",
    model_name="Qwen3-8B",
    device="cuda",
)

# Quick text generation
response = runner.generate("Explain what a registry pattern is in two sentences.")
print(response.text)

# Chat-style prompt with structured messages
chat_request = GenerationRequest.from_messages(
    [
        PromptMessage(role="system", content=[PromptContent(text="You are a math tutor.")]),
        PromptMessage(role="user", content=[PromptContent(text="Help me factor x^2 + 5x + 6.")]),
    ],
    temperature=0.1,
    max_new_tokens=128,
)
chat_response = runner.generate(chat_request)
print(chat_response.text)
```

Runners keep the raw model/tokenizer accessible via `runner.model` / `runner.tokenizer`
so existing diagnostic code can still reach low-level APIs when necessary.

### 2. Load Configuration ⚙️

```python
from deepscan import ConfigLoader

# Load from file
config = ConfigLoader.from_file("config.yaml")

# Or create from dictionary
config = ConfigLoader.from_dict({
    "model": {"generation": "qwen3", "model_name": "Qwen3-8B", "device": "cuda"},
    "dataset": {"name": "beaver_tails", "split": "330k_train"},
    "evaluator": {"type": "tellme", "batch_size": 4},
})
```

### 3. Create and Use Evaluators 🔍

Evaluators are typically used through `run_from_config`, but can also be used programmatically:

```python
from deepscan.evaluators.registry import get_evaluator_registry
from deepscan.registry.model_registry import get_model_registry
from deepscan.registry.dataset_registry import get_dataset_registry

# Get registries
evaluator_registry = get_evaluator_registry()
model_registry = get_model_registry()
dataset_registry = get_dataset_registry()

# Create evaluator from registry (pass options via config=)
evaluator = evaluator_registry.create_evaluator(
    "tellme",
    config=dict(batch_size=4, layer_ratio=0.6666, token_position=-1),
)

# Get model and dataset
model = model_registry.get_model("qwen3", model_name="Qwen3-8B", device="cuda")
dataset = dataset_registry.get_dataset("tellme/beaver_tails_filtered", test_path="/path/to/test.csv")

# Run evaluation (typically done via run_from_config)
# results = evaluator.evaluate(model, dataset, ...)
```

### 4. Create Custom Evaluators 🛠️

```python
from deepscan.evaluators.base import BaseEvaluator
from deepscan.evaluators.registry import get_evaluator_registry

class CustomEvaluator(BaseEvaluator):
    def evaluate(self, model, dataset, **kwargs):
        # Your custom evaluation logic here
        results = {}
        # ... implementation ...
        return results

# Register the evaluator
registry = get_evaluator_registry()
registry.register_evaluator("custom_eval")(CustomEvaluator)

# Use it in config or programmatically (pass options via config=)
evaluator = registry.create_evaluator("custom_eval", config=dict(param1=value1))
```

### 5. Summarize Results 📊

```python
from deepscan.summarizers.base import BaseSummarizer

class SimpleSummarizer(BaseSummarizer):
    def summarize(self, results, benchmark=None, **kwargs):
        # Minimal example: keep a small subset of keys
        return {
            "benchmark": benchmark,
            "keys": sorted(results.keys()),
        }

summarizer = SimpleSummarizer(name="simple")

summary = summarizer.summarize(results, benchmark="beaver_tails")

# Format as markdown
report = summarizer.format_report(summary, format="markdown")
print(report)
```

## 🏗️ Architecture

### Core Components

1. **📦 Registry System** (`deepscan/registry/`)
   - `BaseRegistry`: Generic registry pattern
   - `ModelRegistry`: Model registration and retrieval
   - `DatasetRegistry`: Dataset registration and retrieval

2. **⚙️ Configuration** (`deepscan/config/`)
   - `ConfigLoader`: Load and manage YAML/JSON configurations
   - Supports dot notation for nested access
   - Merge multiple configurations

3. **🔍 Evaluators** (`deepscan/evaluators/`)
   - `BaseEvaluator`: Abstract base class for all evaluators
   - `TellMeEvaluator`: Disentanglement metrics on BeaverTails
   - `XBoundaryEvaluator`: Safety boundary analysis
   - `MiPeaksEvaluator`: Model introspection and peak analysis
   - `SpinEvaluator`: Self-play fine-tuning evaluation
   - `EvaluatorRegistry`: Registry for evaluator classes

4. **📝 Summarizers** (`deepscan/summarizers/`)
   - `BaseSummarizer`: Abstract base class for all summarizers
   - `SummarizerRegistry`: Registry for summarizer classes
   - Multiple output formats (dict, JSON, Markdown, text)

## 🔧 Extending the Framework

### ➕ Adding a New Evaluator

1. Inherit from `BaseEvaluator`
2. Implement the `evaluate` method
3. Register it using the evaluator registry

```python
from deepscan.evaluators.base import BaseEvaluator
from deepscan.evaluators.registry import get_evaluator_registry

class MyEvaluator(BaseEvaluator):
    def evaluate(self, model, dataset, **kwargs):
        # Your evaluation logic
        results = {}
        # ... implementation ...
        return results

# Register
registry = get_evaluator_registry()
registry.register_evaluator("my_evaluator")(MyEvaluator)
```

### ➕ Adding a New Summarizer

1. Inherit from `BaseSummarizer`
2. Implement the `summarize` method
3. Register it using the summarizer registry

```python
from deepscan.summarizers.base import BaseSummarizer
from deepscan.summarizers.registry import get_summarizer_registry

class MySummarizer(BaseSummarizer):
    def summarize(self, results, benchmark=None, **kwargs):
        # Your summarization logic
        return {"summary": "..."}

# Register
registry = get_summarizer_registry()
registry.register_summarizer("my_summarizer")(MySummarizer)
```

## 📋 Example Configuration File

```yaml
# 📝 Minimal TELLME-style config (see `examples/config.tellme.yaml`; see `examples/` for multi-evaluator configs)
model:
  generation: qwen3
  model_name: Qwen3-8B
  device: cuda
  dtype: float16
  # Optional: point to a local checkpoint dir to avoid downloads
  # path: /path/to/models--Qwen--Qwen3-8B

dataset:
  name: tellme/beaver_tails_filtered
  test_path: /path/to/test.csv
  # train_path: /path/to/train.csv
  # max_rows: 400

evaluator:
  type: tellme
  batch_size: 4
  layer_ratio: 0.6666
  token_position: -1
```

## 📚 Examples

See the `examples/` directory for complete usage examples:

**🔍 Single-evaluator:**
- `config.tellme.yaml`: Minimal TELLME disentanglement metrics

**🔗 Multi-evaluator (same model, multiple benchmarks):**
- `config.x-boundary.tellme.spin.mi-peaks.qwen2.5-7b-instruct.yaml`: TELLME, X-Boundary, SPIN, and MI-Peaks with Qwen2.5-7B-Instruct
- `config.xboundary-llama3.3-70b-instruct.yaml`: Same suite with Llama 3.3 70B Instruct

## 💻 Development

```bash
# 📦 Install in development mode
pip install -e ".[dev]"

# ✅ Run tests
pytest

```

## 📄 License

MIT License

## 🤝 Contributing

Contributions are welcome! Please see [CONTRIBUTING.md](CONTRIBUTING.md) for guidelines on how to contribute.

## 📧 Contact

For questions or suggestions, please contact us:

  📧 Email: [shaojing@pjlab.org.cn](mailto:shaojing@pjlab.org.cn)
